# Civara Sewing Guide

## Marking the cloth

Lay out the cloth with the **bottom side facing up**. (See how to [determine the top and bottom side](/en/sabong-guide#determine-the-top-and-bottom-side).)

For a **civara**, draw the marks on the **bottom side**.

<!-- latex
\begin{multicols}{2}
\setlength{\nextPhotoWidth}{\linewidth}
-->

<figure>

![lay out the cloth](/img/civara/en/lay-out-the-cloth-w500.jpg)

</figure>

<!-- latex
\columnbreak
-->

Mark the diagram lines on the cloth with a pencil. Note that the vertical buffer length for the
squaring stage is already included at the ends of the panels. This will allow 10cm vertical
manoeuvring when joined the cloth has to be trimmed.

You can mark the panels joined end-to-end, and the vertical buffer will be left in between.

<!-- latex
\end{multicols}

\clearpage
-->

<figure>

[![Mark the diagram lines](/img/civara/en/mark-diagram-lines-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/mark-diagram-lines-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![end-to-end](/img/civara/en/end-to-end-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/end-to-end-orig.jpg)

</figure>

Remember to leave cloth for the borders along the edges of the cloth. The thread orientation of the
border strips have to be the same as when they are placed on the cloth, otherwise the border will
shrink in a different direction from the cloth under it. Small border pieces can be joined if the
entire length can't be obtained from the sides of the cloth.

When the size of the cloth allow, the long borders can be cut out from the horizontal length, and
the short borders from the vertical length of the cloth.

Cut out the panels. Take care to make clean cuts at the edges which will be joined, if the cloth is
not cut straight or the thread is allowed to fray, it will make joining the edges difficult.

<figure>

![cut-the-cloth](/img/civara/en/cut-the-cloth-w500.jpg)

</figure>

<!-- latex
\setlength{\nextPhotoWidth}{0.6\textwidth}
-->

<figure>

![cloth-already-cut](/img/civara/en/cloth-already-cut-w500.jpg)

</figure>

<!-- latex
\clearpage
-->

## First and second sewing

Make the first sewing and second sewing, same method and sewing order as with the
[sabong](/en/sabong-guide). First (1) the broken vertical lines, (2) then the short horizontals (3)
and the long continuous vertical lines.

The finished sewing will show one thread on the outside, and two threads on the inside.

<figure>

[![first-and-second-sewing](/img/civara/en/first-and-second-sewing-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/first-and-second-sewing-orig.jpg)

</figure>

If you iron the folds before sewing it, the crease will hold better and the cloth needs less
arranging while on the sewing machine.

<figure>

![iron-the-fold](/img/civara/en/iron-the-fold-w500.jpg)

</figure>

Start sewing the broken lines from the outside of the cloth toward the kusi.

<figure>

[![first-sewing](/img/civara/en/first-sewing-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/first-sewing-orig.jpg)

</figure>

When you reach the kusi, you can lift the needle, pull out a bit of thread, pull the cloth to skip
over the kusi, and continue sewing on the other side.

<figure>

[![skipping-the-kusi](/img/civara/en/skipping-the-kusi-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/skipping-the-kusi-orig.jpg)

</figure>

Later, you can secure the loose threads by tying knots on the end at the kusi. This allows to
pinpoint carefully where the sewn line stops, i.e. how close to the line. An alternative method is
to go reverse and forward with the sewing machine at these places to lock the thread.

The thread has to be secured one way or another, because if left loose, it can undo itself and unravel the sewing.

The outer edges of the thread (at the end of the cloth) don't have to be tied, because it will be
closed when adding the border.

<!-- latex
\clearpage
-->

## Joining: method overview

Place the two layer on top of each other, aligned at the joining edge, with the front sides facing
each other. The front, or outer side is where you see a single line of sewing at the kusi.

<figure>

[![join-layers-on-top](/img/civara/en/join-layers-on-top-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-layers-on-top-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-layers-on-top-2](/img/civara/en/join-layers-on-top-2-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-layers-on-top-2-orig.jpg)

</figure>

The width of the fold is determined by the distance of the first joining thread to the edge of the
upper layer, which has its back side facing up. The lower layer extends beyond that edge.

On the lower cloth layer, the distance from the sewn line to the edge has to be at least twice as
wide or more, as the fold that you determined on the upper layer.

If the fold is about 5mm, the complete distance should be about 10 to 15mm.

If you make the fold too narrow, there won't be space to add the second joining thread.


Sew the two layers.

<figure>

[![join-sewing-1](/img/civara/en/join-sewing-1-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-sewing-1-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-distance](/img/civara/en/join-distance-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-distance-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<!-- latex
\clearpage
-->

Open up the two layers, and iron them toward the long overlap. The short overlap lies on top of the long.

<figure>

[![join-fold-out](/img/civara/en/join-fold-out-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-fold-out-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-fold-out-iron](/img/civara/en/join-fold-out-iron-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-fold-out-iron-orig.jpg)

</figure>

While ironing, pull the cloth tight against the sewing line, so that the ironed line doesn't add a
gap where the cloth is loose.

<figure>

[![join-fold-ironed](/img/civara/en/join-fold-ironed-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-fold-ironed-orig.jpg)

</figure>

Fold the long overlap on top of the short overlap, maintaining the edge of the cloth below. You turn
the cloth over the edge, not folding the edge along the sewing line.

<figure>

[![join-fold-over-iron](/img/civara/en/join-fold-over-iron-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-fold-over-iron-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<!-- latex
\clearpage
-->

Trim off the excess cloth.

<!-- latex
\begin{multicols}{2}
\setlength{\nextPhotoWidth}{\linewidth}
-->

<figure>

[![join-trim-excess](/img/civara/en/join-trim-excess-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-trim-excess-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<!-- latex
\columnbreak
\setlength{\nextPhotoWidth}{\linewidth}
-->

<figure>

[![join-trim-excess-2](/img/civara/en/join-trim-excess-2-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-trim-excess-2-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<!-- latex
\end{multicols}

\vspace*{-\baselineskip}
\enlargethispage*{\baselineskip}
-->

Fold both overlaps underneath, turn the long overlap over short one along the edge, and crease it
with the iron.

<figure>

[![join-fold-both](/img/civara/en/join-fold-both-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-fold-both-orig.jpg)

</figure>

Sew along the edge of the fold.

<figure>

[![join-sew-both](/img/civara/en/join-sew-both-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-sew-both-orig.jpg)

</figure>

The join is complete.

<figure>

[![join-complete-back](/img/civara/en/join-complete-back-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-complete-back-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-complete-front](/img/civara/en/join-complete-front-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-complete-front-orig.jpg)

</figure>

When you look at the front side, the kusi is lower than the area next to it on the right.

If you compare it to rice paddies, the kusis are the paths between the fields of rice. When the rice
has grown and is ready to be harvested, the field is higher than the path.

## Joining: marking the position

When the first and second sewing is completed on the three pieces, lay them out in the way they will
be sewn together, to mark the cloth for joining.

Use a long ruler to align the horizontal kusis across the three pieces.

<!-- latex
\begin{multicols}{2}
\setlength{\nextPhotoWidth}{\linewidth}
-->

<figure>

[![lay-out-pieces](/img/civara/en/lay-out-pieces-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/lay-out-pieces-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<!-- latex
\columnbreak
\setlength{\nextPhotoWidth}{\linewidth}
-->

<figure>

[![mark-joining-points](/img/civara/en/mark-joining-points-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/mark-joining-points-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<!-- latex
\end{multicols}
-->

Make a pencil mark where the kusis are going to meet. The cloth may move or strech along the cut
line, and the ends will be trimmed off at the squaring stage, but the kusis have to stay in line.

Use pencil marks such as a V-shape, to make them recognizably different and avoid mixing them up with the lines of other marks.

Mark both edges of the cloth so that the position is not lost later.

<figure>

[![mark-kusis](/img/civara/en/mark-kusis-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/mark-kusis-orig.jpg)

</figure>

Pin the two sides together where the kusis meet the other side, so that these points don't move.

On the upper layer, two threads should be seen, on the lower layer, only one thread.

<figure>

[![pin-the-join](/img/civara/en/pin-the-join-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/pin-the-join-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![pin-the-join-close](/img/civara/en/pin-the-join-close-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/pin-the-join-close-orig.jpg)

</figure>

Sewing them together will start from the kusi, toward the outer edge.

The cloth toward the edges can be allowed to move and strech a bit, the outer edges don't have to
meet exactly.

The kusis must remain in the pinned positions. If there is an extra or missing few cm in the cloth
between the two kusis, or a difference between the upper and lower layer, the cloth has to be
streched or gathered up to absorb the difference.

<!-- latex
\clearpage
-->

## Joining: first sewing

Start sewing from one end of the kusi, across the kusi and moving outward.

When starting from one side, the kusi shows the sewing lines:

<figure>

[![sewing-from-kusi](/img/civara/en/sewing-from-kusi-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/sewing-from-kusi-orig.jpg)

</figure>

When starting from another side, the sewing lines are not visible:

<figure>

[![sewing-from-kusi-2](/img/civara/en/sewing-from-kusi-2-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/sewing-from-kusi-2-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![sewing-from-kusi-3](/img/civara/en/sewing-from-kusi-3-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/sewing-from-kusi-3-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![sewing-from-kusi-4](/img/civara/en/sewing-from-kusi-4-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/sewing-from-kusi-4-orig.jpg)

</figure>

When you have sewn to the end, turn the cloth around, start from the kusi again in the other
direction.

(If you start sewing from the outside in, the kusis will not necessary meet.)

<!-- latex
\clearpage
-->

## Joining: folding and second sewing

The following photos show the above joining method on the civara cloth.

<figure>

[![join-iron-civara](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<!-- latex
\setlength{\nextPhotoWidth}{0.5\textwidth}
-->

<figure>

[![join-iron-civara-2](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-2-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-2-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-iron-civara-3](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-3-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-3-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-iron-civara-6](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-6-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-6-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-iron-civara-6a](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-6a-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-6a-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-iron-civara-4](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-4-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-4-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-iron-civara-5](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-5-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-iron-civara-5-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-civara-trim](/img/civara/en/join-civara-trim-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-civara-trim-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-civara-trim-2](/img/civara/en/join-civara-trim-2-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-civara-trim-2-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-civara-fold-over](/img/civara/en/join-civara-fold-over-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-civara-fold-over-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-civara-fold-iron](/img/civara/en/join-civara-fold-iron-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-civara-fold-iron-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<figure>

[![join-civara-fold-sewing](/img/civara/en/join-civara-fold-sewing-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/join-civara-fold-sewing-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<!-- latex
\clearpage
-->

## Squaring

Lay out the joined cloth, top side facing down. You should see the two threads of the back, or inner side.

Tape the cloth to the floor. You only want it to lie flat, not streched. If the shape of the cloth
is distorted, the trimming lines will be wavy. Attach the tape at the sewn lines, where the cloth
doesn't strech as much.

Use the short side as the base and align the rulers at 90 degrees.

Find the line which you can cut straight along the edge without gaps.

<!-- latex
\begin{multicols}{2}
\setlength{\nextPhotoWidth}{\linewidth}
-->

<figure>

[![squaring-civara-lay-out](/img/civara/en/squaring-civara-lay-out-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/squaring-civara-lay-out-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<!-- latex
\columnbreak
\setlength{\nextPhotoWidth}{\linewidth}
-->

<figure>

[![squaring-civara-rulers](/img/civara/en/squaring-civara-rulers-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/squaring-civara-rulers-orig.jpg)

</figure>

<!-- latex
\end{multicols}
-->

Mark the line with a pencil.

Later, when you put the border on the cloth, in the border area the cloth is doubled and less prone
to streching than the middle part of the robe. The result is that over time, the middle part of the
robe sags and doesn't fold into a neat line.

This can be counteracted by shortening the cloth at the middle.

Find the horizontal center point of the robe and mark a point 1.5cm above the line at the edge.
Mark a line from this point to the corners, creating a roof or `Λ` shape. Do this at both the top
and bottom side.

<figure>

[![squaring-civara-midpoint](/img/civara/en/squaring-civara-midpoint-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/squaring-civara-midpoint-orig.jpg)

</figure>

Cut the cloth along the marked lines.

<figure>

[![squaring-cut](/img/civara/en/squaring-cut-w500.jpg)](/img/civara/en/squaring-cut-orig.jpg)

</figure>

## Borders

Add the [borders](/en/borders).

